[ MID-TEMPO MANDOLIN PLAYS ]
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ PLANS WERE MADE BY THE BANKERS
IN THE BACK ROOM ♪
♪ GET THE PRESIDENT
OUT OF THE WAY ♪
♪ AND HIRE STANLEY KUBRICK ♪
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ EVERYONE HOPED THAT THE BOYS
WOULD COME HOME SOON ♪
♪ ONE MORE DAY AND THEY'LL DROP
FROM THE PLANE ♪
♪ SPLASH INTO THE OCEAN ♪
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ WERNHER von BRAUN
AND HIS CONSPIRATORS ♪
♪ GOT A FREE RIDE
TO THE STATES ♪
♪ THEY TURNED NAZI INTO NASA ♪
♪ THEY JUST COULDN'T WAIT ♪
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ AHH-AH-AH-AH-AH ♪
♪ AHH-AH-AH-AH-AH-AH ♪
♪ AHH-AH-AH-AH-AH-AAAH-AH ♪
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ PLANS WERE MADE BY THE BANKERS
IN THE BACK ROOM ♪
♪ THE OWL SEES INTO THE NIGHT ♪
♪ AND THE SECRET
WILL NEVER BE TOLD ♪
[ WIND WHISTLING ]
IT ALL STARTED FOR
STANLEY KUBRICK IN LATE 1963,
RIGHT BEFORE THE RELEASE
OF "DR. STRANGELOVE."
THIS COLD WAR BLACK COMEDY
TOOK THE STUFFINGS OUT OF ALL
THINGS THAT AMERICA HELD SACRED.
WITH THIS ONE FILM,
STANLEY KUBRICK ROSE UP
TO THE HEIGHTS
OF HIS FILMMAKING ABILITIES.
AND THE PENTAGON WAS NOT HAPPY
WITH "DR. STRANGELOVE"
AND ITS BRUTAL PORTRAYAL
OF MAD MURDEROUS GENERALS
AND THE STUMBLING BUMPKINS
RUNNING THE U.S. WAR MACHINE.
IN FACT, THE PENTAGON
TURNED KUBRICK DOWN
WHEN HE ASKED FOR PERMISSION
TO SHOOT INSIDE AND OUTSIDE
OF ONE OF THEIR B-52 BOMBERS.
ONE READ OF THE SCRIPT
OF "DR. STRANGELOVE"
CONVINCED THEM THAT THIS FILM
WAS GOING TO BE DANGEROUS
AND THAT STANLEY KUBRICK
MIGHT BE AN AGITATOR ARTIST.
THE TOP BRASS
ALL SAW THE FINISHED FILM
IN EARLY FALL OF 1963.
IT WAS AS THEY EXPECTED.
THE FILM MADE FUN
OF THE PENTAGON, THE GENERALS,
AND THEIR VARIOUS WAR PLANS.
BUT THERE WAS SOMETHING ELSE
THAT STRUCK THEM
ABOUT STANLEY KUBRICK'S
DARK COMEDY,
AND THAT WAS THE SCENES BOTH
INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE B-52s.
KUBRICK HAD PASTED TOGETHER
WHAT THE INTERIOR
OF A B-52 LOOKED LIKE
BY TAKING MANY SEPARATE PHOTOS
FROM MILITARY MAGAZINES
AND PUTTING THEM TOGETHER.
THE END RESULT WAS
AN ASTONISHINGLY CLOSE REPLICA
OF THE ACTUAL INTERIOR
OF A B-52.
BUT IT WAS THE EXTERIOR SHOT
OF THE B-52
THAT REALLY EXCITED
THE BOYS IN THE PENTAGON.
QUAINT BY TODAY'S HIGH-TECH
SPECIAL-EFFECTS STANDARDS,
KUBRICK'S EXTERIOR SHOTS
OF THE B-52s FLYING OVER RUSSIA
WERE ABSOLUTELY STUNNING
IN 1964,
ESPECIALLY ON THE BIG SCREEN.
IT WAS SOMETIME IN THE FALL
OF 1963 OR THE WINTER OR 1964
THAT THEY CONTACTED
STANLEY KUBRICK
AND OFFERED HIM A DEAL
THAT HE COULD NOT REFUSE.
IT WAS A DEAL WITH THE DEVIL,
IN A WAY,
OR AT LEAST, THAT IS HOW
STANLEY KUBRICK CAME TO VIEW IT.
BY AN EARNEST STUDY
OF STANLEY KUBRICK'S LIFE,
HIS FILMS,
THE HISTORY OF HIS TIMES,
AND THE UNDERSTANDING
OF HIS SYMBOLIC SYSTEM,
I INTEND TO SHOW YOU
THAT STANLEY KUBRICK
WAS NOT ONLY A FILMMAKER,
BUT THAT HE WAS PRIVY
TO THE MAIN SECRETS
OF AN OCCULT SOCIETY
THAT RULES THE EARTH.
MR. PRESIDENT, I WOULD NOT
RULE OUT THE CHANCE
TO PRESERVE A NUCLEUS
OF HUMAN SPECIMENS.
IT WOULD BE QUITE EASY.
HEH. HEH.
AT THE BOTTOM OF...
SOME OF OUR DEEPER MINE SHAFTS,
RADIOACTIVITY
WOULD NEVER PENETRATE A MINE
SOME THOUSANDS OF FEET DEEP.
AND IN A MATTER OF WEEKS,
SUFFICIENT IMPROVEMENTS
IN DRILLING SPACE
COULD EASILY BE PROVIDED.
HOW LONG WOULD YOU
HAVE TO STAY DOWN THERE?
WELL, LET'S SEE NOW.
THE PENTAGON SAW
"DR. STRANGELOVE,"
AND THEY KNEW
THEY HAD THEIR GUY.
BUT FOR WHAT?
IT WAS AT THAT MOMENT
THAT EVERYTHING
WOULD CHANGE FOR KUBRICK.
IF HE ACCEPTED THEIR OFFER,
HE WOULD GET ANYTHING HE WANTED.
IF HE DECLINED,
THEY MIGHT JUST GET RID OF HIM.
IN A SENSE, ONCE THE OFFER WAS
MADE, STANLEY HAD TO TAKE IT.
AND SO STANLEY KUBRICK
ACCEPTED A DEAL WITH THE DEVIL,
SO TO SPEAK.
IT IS WITH THIS DEAL AND WHAT
IT WOULD DO FOR STANLEY'S CAREER
THAT I WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS
IN THIS FILM.
ALTHOUGH WHAT YOU ARE
ABOUT TO SEE MAY OFFEND YOU,
I ASK THAT YOU STICK WITH
THE IDEA I'M ABOUT TO PRESENT
ALL THE WAY TO THE END.
IT MAY MAKE YOU UNCOMFORTABLE,
BUT AS MORPHEUS SAYS
IN "THE MATRIX,"
"I DIDN'T SAY IT WOULD BE EASY.
I ONLY SAID
IT WOULD BE THE TRUTH."
STANLEY KUBRICK'S ODYSSEY
REALLY BEGAN IN LATE 1963.
HIS OWN EVOLVING STORY
WOULD ALSO BE OUR STORY.
KUBRICK WOULD REVEAL
MUCH OF THE TRUTH OF OUR AGE
OVER THE REST OF HIS LIFE.
BECAUSE OF THE DEAL HE MADE,
KUBRICK WAS FREE TO MAKE FILMS
THAT WOULD ALTER THE WAY
THAT WE LOOK AT OURSELVES,
OUR HISTORY, AND OUR DESTINY.
WITH THIS FREE MEAL TICKET,
KUBRICK COULD HAVE GONE ON
TO MAKE JOURNEYMAN FILMS.
INSTEAD, HE USED THE MEDIUM
TO REVEAL THE DARKEST
AND THE LIGHTEST ASPECTS
OF THE HUMAN CONDITION.
SO, WHAT WAS THE DEAL THAT HE
MADE IN 1963 WITH THE MILITARY?
THAT DEAL WAS
THAT STANLEY KUBRICK WOULD FILM
AND FAKE
THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS.
IT HAS NOW BEEN 40 YEARS
SINCE THE FABLED MOON LANDING
BY NASA AND THE APOLLO GANG.
WHEN IT COMES TO THE SUBJECT
OF THE MOON LANDINGS,
PEOPLE TEND TO FALL
INTO TWO BELIEF GROUPS.
THE FIRST GROUP, BY FAR
THE BIGGER OF THE TWO GROUPS,
ACCEPTS THE FACT
THAT NASA SUCCESSFULLY LANDED
ON THE MOON SIX TIMES
AND THAT 12 HUMAN BEINGS
HAVE ACTUALLY WALKED
ON THE SURFACE OF THE MOON.
THE SECOND GROUP,
THOUGH FAR SMALLER,
IS MORE VOCAL
ABOUT THEIR BELIEFS.
THIS GROUP SAYS
THAT WE NEVER WENT TO THE MOON,
THAT THE ENTIRE THING WAS FAKED.
I WOULD LIKE TO PRESENT
A THIRD POSITION ON THIS ISSUE.
THIS THIRD POINT OF VIEW
FALLS SOMEWHERE BETWEEN
THESE TWO ASSERTIONS.
THIS THIRD POSITION POSTULATES
THAT HUMANS DID GO TO THE MOON,
BUT WHAT WE SAW ON TV
AND IN PHOTOGRAPHS
WAS COMPLETELY FAKED.
FURTHERMORE, THIS THIRD POSITION
REVEALS THAT STANLEY KUBRICK
IS THE GENIUS
WHO DIRECTED
THE HOAXED LANDINGS.
IN SOME WAYS, NASA'S POSITION
WAS UNDERSTANDABLE.
WE WERE IN THE MIDDLE
OF A COLD WAR
WITH THE SOVIET UNION.
DID WE REALLY WANT TO SHOW
THE RUSSIANS WHAT WE HAD?
IN FALL 1963,
STANLEY KUBRICK HAD
JUST FINISHED "DR. STRANGELOVE"
AND WAS LOOKING TO DO
A SCIENCE-FICTION FILM.
SOMEONE IN NASA OR THE PENTAGON
SAW WHAT KUBRICK HAD DONE IN
"DR. STRANGELOVE" WITH THE B-52s
AND, ADMIRING HIS ARTFULNESS,
DESIGNATED KUBRICK AS THE PERSON
BEST QUALIFIED TO DIRECT
THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS.
IF HE COULD DO THAT WELL
ON A LIMITED BUDGET,
WHAT COULD HE DO
ON AN UNLIMITED BUDGET?
NO ONE KNOWS HOW
THE POWERS THAT BE
CONVINCED KUBRICK
TO DIRECT THE APOLLO LANDINGS.
MAYBE THEY HAD COMPROMISED
KUBRICK IN SOME WAY.
KUBRICK ALSO HAD A REPUTATION
FOR BEING A NOTORIOUSLY NASTY
NEGOTIATOR.
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN INTERESTING
TO HAVE BEEN A FLY ON THE WALL
DURING THE NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN
KUBRICK AND THE PENTAGON.
IN THE END, IT LOOKS LIKE
KUBRICK FAKED THE MOON LANDINGS
IN RETURN FOR TWO THINGS.
THE FIRST WAS
A VIRTUALLY UNLIMITED BUDGET
TO MAKE HIS ULTIMATE
SCIENCE-FICTION FILM,
"2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY,"
AND THE SECOND WAS
THAT HE WOULD BE ABLE TO MAKE
ANY FILM HE WANTED
WITH NO OVERSIGHT FROM ANYONE
FOR THE REST OF HIS LIFE.
EXCEPT FOR HIS LAST FILM,
"EYES WIDE SHUT,"
KUBRICK GOT WHAT HE WANTED.
IT IS UNCANNY
THE WAY THAT THE PRODUCTION
OF "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY"
PARALLELS THE APOLLO PROGRAM.
THE FILM PRODUCTION
STARTED IN 1964.
IT WENT ON TO THE RELEASE OF
"2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY" IN 1968.
MEANWHILE, THE APOLLO PROGRAM
ALSO BEGAN IN 1964
AND CULMINATED WITH THE FIRST
MOON LANDINGS ON JULY 20, 1969.
IT IS ALSO VERY INTERESTING
TO NOTE
THAT THE SCIENTIST
FREDERICK ORDWAY
WAS WORKING BOTH FOR NASA
AND THE APOLLO PROGRAM
AND WAS ALSO KUBRICK'S
TOP SCIENCE ADVISOR
FOR "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY."
ONCE HE HAD NEGOTIATED THE DEAL,
STANLEY GOT TO WORK.
THE MOST PRESSING PROBLEM
FOR KUBRICK IN 1964
WAS TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO MAKE
THE SHOTS ON THE GROUND,
ON THE SURFACE OF THE MOON,
LOOK REALISTIC.
HE HAD TO MAKE THE SCENES
LOOK WIDE OPEN AND EXPANSIVE,
LIKE IT WAS REALLY DONE
ON THE MOON
AND NOT ON SOME STUDIO BACK LOT.
NO ONE KNOWS
HOW MANY THINGS HE TRIED,
BUT EVENTUALLY, KUBRICK SETTLED
ON DOING THE ENTIRE THING
WITH A CINEMATIC TECHNIQUE
CALLED FRONT-SCREEN PROJECTION.
IT IS IN THE USE
OF THIS CINEMATIC TECHNIQUE
THAT THE FINGERPRINTS OF KUBRICK
CAN BE SEEN
ALL OVER THE NASA APOLLO
PHOTOGRAPHIC AND VIDEO MATERIAL.
[ INDISTINCT RADIO CHATTER ]
BUT WHAT IS
FRONT-SCREEN PROJECTION?
KUBRICK DID NOT INVENT
THE PROCESS,
BUT THERE IS NO DOUBT
THAT HE PERFECTED IT.
FRONT-SCREEN PROJECTION
IS A CINEMATIC DEVICE
THAT ALLOWS SCENES TO BE
PROJECTED BEHIND THE ACTORS
SO THAT IT APPEARS
IN THE CAMERA
AS IF THE ACTORS
ARE MOVING AROUND ON THE SET
PROVIDED BY THE FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION.
THE PROCESS CAME INTO FRUITION
WHEN THE 3M COMPANY INVENTED
A MATERIAL CALLED SCOTCHLITE.
THIS WAS A SCREEN MATERIAL
THAT WAS MADE UP OF HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF TINY GLASS BEADS.
THESE BEADS WERE
HIGHLY REFLECTIVE.
IN THE FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION PROCESS,
THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN
WOULD BE PLACED
AT THE BACK OF THE SOUND STAGE.
THE PLANE OF THE CAMERA LENS
AND THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN
HAD TO BE
EXACTLY 90 DEGREES APART.
A PROJECTOR WOULD PROJECT THE
SCENE ONTO THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN
THROUGH A MIRROR,
AND THE LIGHT WOULD GO THROUGH
A BEAM SPLITTER,
WHICH WOULD PASS THE LIGHT
INTO THE CAMERA.
AN ACTOR COULD STAND IN FRONT
OF THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN,
AND HE WOULD APPEAR TO BE
INSIDE THE PROJECTION.
TODAY, HOLLYWOOD'S MAGICIANS
USE GREEN SCREENS AND COMPUTERS
FOR SPECIAL EFFECTS,
AND SO THE FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION SYSTEM
HAS GONE THE WAY
OF THE ADDING MACHINE
AND THE MODEL T.
BUT FOR ITS TIME,
ESPECIALLY IN THE 1960s,
NOTHING WORKED BETTER
THAN FRONT-SCREEN PROJECTION
FOR THAT REALISTIC LOOK
THAT WOULD BE NEEDED
BOTH FOR THE APE-MAN SCENES
IN "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY"
AND THE FAKED
APOLLO MOON LANDINGS.
TO SEE HOW FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION LOOKS ON THE SCREEN,
LET'S EXAMINE THE APE-MAN SCENES
AT THE BEGINNING OF KUBRICK'S
FILM, "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY."
ONE HAS TO REMEMBER
THAT THE EARLY SCENES IN "2001"
WITH THE ACTORS IN APE COSTUMES
WERE ALL DONE ON A SOUND STAGE.
NONE OF WHAT YOU ARE SEEING
IN THE APE-MAN SCENES
AT THE BEGINNING OF "2001"
WAS ACTUALLY SHOT OUTSIDE.
THE SCENES THAT SURROUND
THE APE-MEN IN "2001"
ARE ACTUALLY SLIDES OF A DESERT
BEING PROJECTED
ONTO THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN
STANDING AT THE REAR OF THE SET.
IN ORDER TO CREATE
THESE DESERT BACKGROUNDS,
KUBRICK SENT A PHOTOGRAPHIC TEAM
TO SPAIN
TO SHOOT 8x10 EKTACHROME SLIDES.
THESE SLIDES ARE THEN PROJECTED
VIA THE FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION SYSTEM
ONTO THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN.
THE ACTORS IN APE COSTUME
STOOD IN FRONT OF THE SCREEN,
ACTING OUT THE SCRIPT.
IF YOU WATCH "2001" ON DVD,
YOU CAN ACTUALLY SEE THE SEAMS
OF THE SCREEN OCCASIONALLY
BEHIND THE GYRATING APES.
KUBRICK WAS DOING
FRONT-SCREEN PROJECTION
ON SUCH A HUGE AND GRAND FASHION
THAT THE TECHNICIANS WERE FORCED
TO SEW TOGETHER
MANY SCREENS OF SCOTCHLITE
SO THAT KUBRICK COULD CREATE
THE VASTNESS NEEDED
FOR THE APE SCENES
TO BE BELIEVABLE.
IN THIS SCENE TAKEN
FROM AN EARLY SCENE IN "2001,"
YOU CAN SEE THE SEAMS IN THE
BLUE SKY IF YOU LOOK CLOSELY.
THIS NEXT IMAGE IS ONE
THAT I HAVE PROCESSED
THROUGH A GRAPHICS PROGRAM.
IN THIS PROCESSING,
I HAVE INCREASED THE GAMMA
AND INCREASED THE CONTRAST.
NOW WE CAN CLEARLY SEE THE SEAMS
AND THE STITCHING
OF THE SCOTCHLITE
FRONT-PROJECTION
SCREEN IN THE SKY.
TO GET THE PERSPECTIVE CORRECT,
ONE HAS TO REALIZE
THAT THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN
IS RIGHT BEHIND
THE ROCKY OUTCROPPING SET
WHICH WAS BUILT
ON A SOUND STAGE.
THE LINES ON THE SCREEN ARE THE
FLAWS IN THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN.
THESE FLAWS IN THE SCREEN
GIVE THE SKY A PECULIAR GEOMETRY
WHEN THE IMAGE
IS PROPERLY PROCESSED
TO REVEAL THE FRONT-PROJECTION
SCOTCHLITE SCREEN.
TO SHOW ANOTHER EXAMPLE,
HERE IS A SCENE FROM
THE WATERHOLE SCENE FROM "2001."
THIS IS THE SAME IMAGE,
BUT AGAIN WITH THE GAMMA
AND CONTRAST INCREASED.
WHILE WATCHING "2001"
WITH THE SCENES OF THE APE-MEN,
ONE CAN BEGIN TO SEE
THE TELLTALE FINGERPRINTS
THAT ALWAYS REVEAL
WHEN THE FRONT-PROJECTION
SCREEN SYSTEM IS USED.
IT SHOULD BE EMPHASIZED
THAT THE SETS THAT SURROUND THE
APE-MEN IN THE MOVIE ARE REAL.
THOSE ARE REAL ROCKS,
WHETHER PAPIER-MâCHé OR REAL,
THAT SURROUND THE APE-MEN.
BUT BEHIND THE FABRICATED ROCKS
ON THE SET,
THE DESERT SCENE
IS BEING PROJECTED
VIA FRONT-SCREEN PROJECTOR.
ONE OF THE WAYS
THAT YOU CAN TELL
THE FRONT-SCREEN SYSTEM
IS BEING USED
IS THAT
THE BOTTOM HORIZON LINE
BETWEEN THE ACTUAL SET
AND THE BACKGROUND
SCOTCHLITE SCREEN
HAS TO BE BLOCKED.
KUBRICK STRATEGICALLY
LOCATED ROCKS AND OTHER THINGS
NEAR THE BOTTOM OF THE SCENE
IN ORDER TO HIDE
THE PROJECTION SCREEN.
IN OTHER WORDS,
THE CAMERA AND THE VIEWERS
WOULD SEE THE BOTTOM OF
THE BACKGROUND-PROJECTION SCREEN
IF IT WERE NOT BLOCKED
IN SOME FASHION.
AS PART OF THE TRICK,
IT BECOMES NECESSARY
TO PLACE THINGS IN BETWEEN
THE SCREEN AND THE SET
TO HIDE THE BOTTOM
OF THE SCREEN.
I HAVE PHOTOSHOPPED A LINE
DIFFERENTIATING THE SET
AND THE BACKGROUND SCOTCHLITE
FRONT-PROJECTION SCREEN.
PLEASE NOTE HOW EVERYTHING
IS IN FOCUS,
FROM THE PEBBLES ON THE GROUND
IN THE SET
TO THE DESERT MOUNTAINS BEYOND.
YOU WILL SEE THAT HIDING THE
BOTTOM OF THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN
IS ALWAYS BEING DONE
WHEN THE FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION SYSTEM IS BEING USED
IN "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY."
HIDING THE SCREEN
IS ONE OF THE FINGERPRINTS.
IT IS EVIDENCE OF ITS USE.
JUST LIKE THE STAGE MAGICIAN
WHO NEEDS THE LONG SLEEVES
OF HIS COSTUME
TO HIDE THE MECHANISM
OF HIS TRICKS,
SO, TOO, KUBRICK NEEDED TO HIDE
THE MECHANISM OF HIS TRICK
BEHIND THE CAREFULLY PLACED
HORIZON LINE
BETWEEN SET AND SCREEN.
HERE'S ANOTHER EXAMPLE
FROM "2001."
AND HERE IS THE SAME IMAGE
WITH MY PHOTOSHOP LINE.
AS YOU WILL SEE
BEFORE THIS FILM IS FINISHED,
THIS SAME FINGERPRINT,
THIS SAME EVIDENCE,
IS CLEARLY SEEN
IN ALL OF THE NASA APOLLO STILLS
AND VIDEO IMAGES.
IT IS THIS FINGERPRINT
THAT REVEALS
NOT ONLY THAT NASA
FAKED THE APOLLO MISSIONS,
BUT HOW THEY FAKED THEM.
LET'S EXAMINE
A FEW NASA APOLLO IMAGES NOW.
THIS IS A STILL FROM APOLLO 17.
THIS IS ALSO A GREAT EXAMPLE
OF THE FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION PROCESS.
AGAIN, I HAVE PHOTOSHOPPED
A LINE
INDICATING THE BACK OF THE SET.
ONE CAN SEE
THAT THERE IS A SLIGHT UPRISING
BEHIND THE ROVER, WHICH IS
HIDING THE BOTTOM OF THE SCREEN.
ALSO NOTICE THAT EVEN THOUGH
EVERYTHING IS IN FOCUS,
FROM THE LUNAR ROVER TO
THE MOUNTAINS IN THE BACKGROUND,
THERE'S A STRANGE CHANGE
IN THE LANDSCAPE OF THE GROUND
RIGHT BEHIND MY LINES.
THIS IS BECAUSE THE PHOTO
OF THE MOUNTAINS
BEING USED
ON THE FRONT-PROJECTION SYSTEM
HAS A SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT
GROUND TEXTURE THAN THE SET.
AS WE GO ON, WE WILL SEE
THAT THIS FINGERPRINT
IS ALSO CONSISTENT
THROUGHOUT THE APOLLO IMAGES.
HERE'S ANOTHER APOLLO IMAGE.
NOW HERE IS MY VERSION
WHERE I SHOW THE LINE
BETWEEN THE SET AND THE SCREEN.
AGAIN, NOTICE THE TEXTURE
OF THE GROUND CHANGES
RIGHT BEHIND MY LINE.
NOW LET'S GO
TO SOME MORE APOLLO IMAGES.
WE CAN SEE THAT
THE SAME THING OCCURS HERE
AS IN THE APE-MAN SCENES
IN "2001."
THERE IS ALWAYS A LINE
SEPARATING THE SET
FROM THE SCREEN.
EVEN IF YOU DO NOT
SEE IT AT FIRST,
IT WILL BECOME APPARENT
AS ONE GROWS MORE FAMILIAR
WITH THE FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION PROCESS
AND HOW IT IS BEING USED
TO FAKE THE ASTRONAUTS STANDING
ON THE LUNAR SURFACE.
GO TO ANY NASA SITE
LIKE www.apolloarchive.com
AND START LOOKING FOR YOURSELF.
NOT ALL LUNAR SURFACE SHOTS
ARE USING THE PROCESS.
SOMETIMES THE ASTRONAUTS
ARE JUST STANDING ON THE SET
WITH A COMPLETELY AND SUSPICIOUS
BLACK BACKGROUND.
THE EARLY MISSIONS,
APOLLO 11 AND 12,
USED THE FRONT-SCREEN PROJECTION
SYSTEM ONLY WHEN THEY HAD TO.
BUT AS THE MISSIONS WENT ON
AND THEY HAD TO LOOK BETTER,
KUBRICK BEGAN TO PERFECT
THE PROCESS.
ALTHOUGH YOU CAN SEE THE
FRONT-SCREEN PROJECTION PROCESS
ON EVERY MISSION,
THE SERIOUSLY REVEALING IMAGES
ARE IN THE LATER MISSIONS,
PARTICULARLY APOLLO 14, 15, 16,
AND -- MY FAVORITE -- 17.
HERE ARE A FEW FROM APOLLO 17.
THE ASTRONAUT IS DRIVING
THE LUNAR ROVER
PARALLEL TO THE SCREEN,
AND THE ROVER
IS ONLY THREE OR FOUR FEET
AWAY FROM THE SCOTCHLITE.
PLEASE NOTE HOW THE TIRE TREADS
JUST LEAD TO NOWHERE.
ACTUALLY, THEY ARE GOING
TO THE EDGE OF THE SET.
IN THIS ONE, THE ASTRONAUT
IS ABOUT SIX FEET IN FRONT
OF THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN.
PLEASE NOTE HOW EVERYTHING
IS IN FOCUS,
FROM THE ROCKS AND PEBBLES
CLOSE TO THE CAMERA
ALL THE WAY TO THE CRYSTAL CLEAR
MOUNTAIN BEHIND THE ASTRONAUT.
AS WE SHALL SEE,
EVEN THAT IS IMPOSSIBLE.
ALSO, PLEASE NOTE
THE OTHER TELLTALE EVIDENCE
THAT PERMEATES
THE APOLLO IMAGES.
THERE'S A STARK DIFFERENCE
IN THE GROUND TEXTURE
BETWEEN THE SET AND WHAT IS
BEING PROJECTED ONTO THE SCREEN.
YOU CAN ALMOST COUNT
THE NUMBER OF SMALL ROCKS,
AND THE GRANULARITY
OF THE GROUND
IS CLEARLY SEEN ON THE SET.
BUT ONCE WE GET TO THE SCREEN
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF MY LINE,
THIS GRANULARITY DISAPPEARS.
THIS NEXT IMAGE
IS A SLICK LITTLE PIECE OF WORK.
WHEN FIRST VIEWED, ONE IS SURE
THAT THEY ARE LOOKING
ACROSS THE VAST, UNBROKEN LUNAR
SURFACE FROM BEGINNING TO END.
WITH THE EARTH RISING,
IT IS TRULY A STUNNING SHOT.
BUT SURE ENOUGH,
CLOSE EXAMINATION REVEALS
A SET-SCREEN LINE ONCE AGAIN.
AGAIN, PLEASE NOTE THE CHANGE
IN THE TEXTURE OF THE GROUND
IMMEDIATELY
ON EACH SIDE OF THE LINE.
THE LITTLE PEBBLES AND DUST
JUST SEEM TO DISAPPEAR
BEHIND MY LINE.
FORMER NASA CONSULTANT
RICHARD HOAGLAND
HAS EXAMINED MANY OF THE PHOTOS
OF THE APOLLO LANDINGS.
EXAMINING THE PHOTOGRAPHIC
RECORD OF THE APOLLO MISSIONS
AND PROCESSING APOLLO IMAGES
THROUGH VARIOUS
GRAPHIC PROGRAMS,
HOAGLAND HAS DISCOVERED
GEOMETRIES IN THE SKIES
SURROUNDING THE ASTRONAUTS
ON THE MOON.
EXTRAORDINARY.
I MEAN, MIND-BLOWING
THIS IS A CLOSEUP.
WE SEE THE HILLS.
WE SEE JUST HINTS THAT SOMETHING
IS NOT QUITE RIGHT IN THE SKY.
AND WHEN YOU SCAN IT
AND SIMPLY TURN UP THE GAME,
TURN UP THE BRIGHTNESS,
THERE ALL OVER THE SKY
IS A STUNNING SET OF GEOMETRY --
GLASSLIKE, SEMI-TRANSPARENT,
SCATTERING GEOMETRY,
SCATTERING BLUE LIGHT
WHICH TELLS US
THAT IT MUST BE FINE PARTICLES,
FINE STUFF, VERY MICRON-SIZE,
WITH VARIOUS IMPERFECTIONS,
HOLES, SPARKLES --
THE WHOLE NINE YARDS.
THIS IS WHAT KEN CAUGHT THEM
PAINTING OUT IN THE LRL
BECAUSE EVERYBODY KNOWS YOU
CAN'T SEE STARS FROM THE MOON.
THE BRIGHT THINGS
WERE NOT STARS.
THEY WERE SHINING BITS OF GLASS
SCATTERING SUNLIGHT
RECORDED BY THESE PRIMITIVE,
BY TODAY'S STANDARDS,
HASSELBLAD CAMERAS
ON 35mm EKTACHROME FILM.
STARTING WITH THIS IMAGE,
WE THEN DID SECTIONALS.
AND WE FOUND
THAT AS YOU ZOOMED IN,
YOU GOT MORE AND MORE DETAIL
IN THIS SUPPOSEDLY BLACK SKY
ABOVE THE MOON.
REMEMBER, IT'S A VACUUM.
NO ATMOSPHERE.
THERE SHOULD BE NOTHING HERE.
IT SHOULD BE PITCH BLACK.
THAT, AGAIN, IS WHY
THEY WERE PAINTING IT OUT.
THIS ALL FITS TOGETHER
AWFULLY, AWFULLY WELL,
AND I USE THE TERM "AWFULLY"
WITH FULL KNOWLEDGE.
IF YOU LOOK CAREFULLY
AT THIS SECTION, YOU'LL SEE NOW
THAT THERE IS
A STUNNING 3-DIMENSIONAL,
GIRDER-LIKE GEOMETRY,
A SCAFFOLDING, REBAR,
A STRUCTURAL MATRIX,
STANDING ABOVE THE MOON,
ANCHORED TO THE SURFACE
BY A SET OF SLANTED BUTTRESSES.
THE GEOMETRY IS PERFECT,
MEANING IT ABSOLUTELY
IS CONSISTENT
WITH WHAT CONSTRUCTIONAL
TECHNIQUES WOULD BE THERE
IF YOU HAD BUILT SOMETHING
MILES HIGH
ABOVE THE CURRENT SURFACE
OF THE MOON.
IF YOU LOOK IN CLOSEUP,
YOU'LL SEE IN THE BUTTRESSES,
THERE ARE LAYERS OF DETAIL.
THIS, AGAIN, IS, TO ME,
AMAZING, STUNNING QUALITY
BECAUSE WE HAD NOT HAD ACCESS
TO ANYTHING
APPROACHING THIS LOW GENERATION
FROM THE APOLLO NEGATIVES.
HE POSTULATES
THAT THESE GEOMETRIES
ARE EVIDENCE OF SOME KIND OF
GIGANTIC GLASSLIKE STRUCTURES
BEHIND, ABOVE,
AND SURROUNDING THE ASTRONAUTS
AS THEY STAND
ON THE LUNAR SURFACE.
HOAGLAND EVEN SHOWS US
THAT THERE ARE RAINBOW LIGHTS
REFLECTING IN THE SKY,
HIGH ABOVE THE ASTRONAUTS.
MANY PEOPLE, ESPECIALLY IN NASA,
HAVE ATTACKED HOAGLAND
FOR THESE INTERPRETATIONS.
YET, NO MATTER HOW MUCH
THEY ATTACK HOAGLAND,
THEY CAN NEVER EXPLAIN
WHAT IT IS
THAT HE'S FINDING
ON THESE APOLLO IMAGES.
I, LIKE HOAGLAND,
BELIEVE THAT NASA HAS
ACTUALLY GONE TO THE MOON.
I BELIEVE THAT MOON ROCKS
WERE TAKEN FROM THE SURFACE
OF THE MOON.
I BELIEVE THAT THERE IS
STRONG EVIDENCE
OF SOME KIND OF PAST
INTELLIGENT ACTIVITY
ON THE SURFACE OF THE MOON.
BUT I DO NOT BELIEVE
THAT STANDARD ROCKET TECHNOLOGY
IS WHAT GOT MANKIND
FROM THE EARTH
TO THE SURFACE OF THE MOON.
I'M NOT TRYING TO DEBUNK
HOAGLAND'S DISCOVERIES.
ALL I'M TRYING TO DO
WITH THE FOLLOWING EVIDENCE
IS TO SHOW THAT
THE APOLLO LANDINGS WERE A HOAX
AND THAT STANLEY KUBRICK,
USING THE FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION SYSTEM,
DIRECTED THEM.
AGAIN, I WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT I'M UNDERSTOOD HERE.
I'M NOT SAYING THAT
THERE ARE NOT STRANGE
STRUCTURES ON THE MOON.
WHAT I AM SAYING IS THAT
THE STRUCTURES AND GEOMETRIES
THAT RICHARD HOAGLAND
IS SEEING IN THE PHOTOGRAPHS
TAKEN ON THE LUNAR SURFACE
ARE NOT WHAT HE THINKS THEY ARE.
HE BELIEVES THAT THESE IMAGES
ARE PROOF
THAT NASA IS HIDING EVIDENCE
OF ALIEN CITIES.
THIS IS A PROCESSED PHOTOGRAPH
OF ASTRONAUT ED MITCHELL
ON THE SURFACE OF THE MOON TAKEN
DURING THE APOLLO 14 MISSION.
OF COURSE,
ALL THE STUFF IN THE SKY
AS SEEN IN THIS PROCESSED
APOLLO IMAGE FROM HOAGLAND
IS IMPOSSIBLE IF IT WAS TAKEN
ON THE LUNAR SURFACE.
THERE'S NO ATMOSPHERE
ON THE MOON.
THEREFORE, THERE CAN BE
NOTHING IN THE SKY.
YET WHEN HOAGLAND PROCESSED
MUCH OF THE APOLLO
LUNAR-SURFACE IMAGERY,
HE DISCOVERED
OVER AND OVER AGAIN
ALL OF THIS CRUD IN THE SKY
ABOVE THE ASTRONAUTS.
NO ONE IN NASA EVEN ATTEMPTS
TO ANSWER HOAGLAND
OR ANYONE ELSE
ABOUT THE STRANGE STUFF
THAT HE AND OTHERS IS FINDING IN
THE SKIES ABOVE THE ASTRONAUTS.
RICHARD HOAGLAND THEORIZES THAT
THIS IS PHOTOGRAPHIC EVIDENCE
OF HUGE ABANDONED GLASS CITIES
ON THE SURFACE OF THE MOON.
HE SAYS THAT WHAT WE ARE SEEING
IN THESE PROCESSED IMAGES
IS HUGE GLASS TOWERS
THAT ONLY SHOW UP ON THE IMAGES
AFTER THEY'VE BEEN PROCESSED
THROUGH THE GRAPHICS SOFTWARE.
HOAGLAND HAS TAKEN AN IMAGE
ON THE LEFT
AND PROCESSED IT IN A MANNER
VERY SIMILAR
TO HOW I PROCESSED THE IMAGES
FROM "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY."
BY INCREASING THE GAMMA
AND THE CONTRAST OF THE IMAGE,
HE ARRIVED AT THE PICTURE
ON THE RIGHT.
HOAGLAND INTERPRETS
THE IMAGE ON THE RIGHT
AS PROOF OF GIANT GLASS
STRUCTURES
BEHIND THE ASTRONAUT,
AND FOR THAT MATTER,
ALL OVER THE SURFACE
OF THE MOON.
WHAT HOAGLAND IS REALLY SEEING,
THOUGH,
IS THE IMPERFECTIONS OF
THE BACKGROUND SCOTCHLITE SCREEN
THAT KUBRICK USED TO CREATE
THE LUNAR BACKGROUNDS.
THESE IMPERFECTIONS CAN ALSO BE
FOUND IN THE DESERT BACKGROUNDS
IN THE APE SCENES IN "2001."
LOOKING NORTH,
INTO TAURUS-LITTROW,
HERE'S SUPPOSEDLY A MOUNTAIN,
HERE'S A BIGGER MOUNTAIN.
LOOK AT THE SKY UP ABOVE.
AND IN THE SKY,
YOU WILL SEE THIS INSET.
AND IN THE INSET, THERE IS
THIS INCREDIBLE RAINBOW.
WHAT HOAGLAND
IN THE ABOVE IMAGE REVEALS
IS THE TEXTURE AND GEOMETRY
OF THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN.
BECAUSE OF THE VASTNESS
OF THE SET,
BECAUSE HE NEEDED IT
TO LOOK LIKE IT WAS NOT DONE
ON A SOUND STAGE,
KUBRICK HAD TO SEW SEVERAL
SCOTCHLITE SCREENS TOGETHER.
IT WAS ONLY WHEN HE HAD CREATED
A LARGE ENOUGH SCOTCHLITE SCREEN
WAS HE THEN ABLE TO GET
A LARGE ENOUGH BACKGROUND IMAGE
THAT WOULD LOOK EXPANSIVE ENOUGH
TO APPEAR TO BE THE SURFACE
OF THE MOON
OR A DESERT 4 MILLION YEARS AGO.
THE SAME PROCESS THAT CREATED
THE DESERT BACKGROUNDS IN "2001"
IS THE SAME PROCESS THAT CREATED
THE LUNAR MOUNTAIN BACKGROUND
FOR THE APOLLO MISSIONS.
THIS IS A PICTURE
FROM HOAGLAND'S RESEARCH.
THIS PROCESSED IMAGE REVEALS A
RAINBOW-LIKE REFLECTING LIGHT
HIGH IN THE SKY ABOVE
THE ASTRONAUTS ON THE MOON.
HOAGLAND THEORIZES
THAT THIS IS LIGHT
REFLECTING OFF
ONE OF THE GIANT GLASS TOWERS
STANDING RIGHT BEHIND
THE ASTRONAUT.
WHAT THIS REALLY IS
IS A LIGHT
REFLECTING OFF
ONE OF THE TINY GLASS BEADS
OF THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN.
FOR SOME REASON,
THAT PARTICULAR GLASS BEAD
WAS SLIGHTLY OFF
FROM ITS 90-DEGREE ANGLE,
AND SO IT CAUGHT
THE PROJECTOR LIGHT
AND REFLECTED IT
BACK INTO THE CAMERA.
AGAIN, A SCENE FROM "2001"...
...AND NOW ONE OF HOAGLAND'S
PROCESSED APOLLO SHOTS.
IT IS PRETTY CLEAR
THAT HOAGLAND'S GEOMETRIES
ARE REALLY THE PATTERNS
AND FLAWS
OF THE STITCHES
IN THE SCOTCHLITE SCREEN.
FURTHERMORE,
IF YOU LOOK IN THE BACKGROUND,
HERE'S ANOTHER ONE
OF THESE AMAZING GLASS PRISM,
PRISMATIC DISTORTIONS
CAPTURED BEHIND SCHMITT.
AND THE OVERVIEW IS THIS.
HERE'S THE WIDE ANGLE.
THERE'S THIS INCREDIBLE COLOR
WHICH CANNOT EXIST.
IT IS IDENTICAL
IN PRINCIPLE TO THIS.
THIS IS SHOT OF THE GOLDEN GATE
LOOKING TOWARD THE EAST
WITH THE SUN
SETTING IN THE WEST,
ERGO THE NAME "GOLDEN GATE."
THIS IS ATMOSPHERE
SCATTERING RED, GREEN, BLUE.
IT'S BASICALLY THE ATMOSPHERE
ACTING LIKE A MOVIE SCREEN.
BUT THERE'S MORE --
ONE OF THE MANY THINGS
THAT MANY RESEARCHERS
HAVE DISCOVERED
ABOUT THE APOLLO FOOTAGE
IS THAT IF YOU SLIGHTLY SPEED UP
THE FOOTAGE OF THE ASTRONAUTS
WALKING AROUND
ON THE LUNAR SURFACE,
THEY APPEAR TO BE DOING
THEIR BUSINESS IN NORMAL SPEED,
LIKE THEY ARE ON EARTH.
IT IS APPARENT THAT THE FOOTAGE
HAS BEEN SHOT IN SLOW-MOTION
TO GIVE THE EFFECT
OF A LOW-GRAVITY SITUATION.
IT SEEMS ODD
THAT ONE WOULD MOVE SLOWER
IN A LOW-GRAVITY ENVIRONMENT
BECAUSE THE LOW GRAVITY
WOULD CAUSE EVEN LESS
RESISTANCE, NOT MORE.
IN THE SCENES IN "2001"
NEAR THE BEGINNING,
WE SEE THE PEOPLE ON THE SHIP
AND ON THE LUNAR SURFACE
ALSO MOVING IN A SLIGHTLY
SLOW-MOTION MANNER.
AGAIN, THIS DOESN'T MAKE
A LOT OF SENSE
IN A REAL-LIFE SITUATION.
IF ANYTHING, THEY SHOULD BE
MOVING FASTER THAN ON EARTH
BECAUSE THERE'S LESS GRAVITY.
BUT SHOWING ASTRONAUTS
MOVING NORMALLY
REALLY CAUSES THE ACTION
TO LOOK UNREAL AND STAGED.
SO KUBRICK DECIDED TO SHOOT
THE MOON SCENES
BOTH IN "2001"
AND IN THE APOLLO LANDINGS
IN SLOW MOTION
TO MAKE IT MORE CONVINCING.
IN A WAY, WE WERE BEING SET UP
BY THE FILM "2001"
TO ACCEPT THE ODD SLOW-MOTION
IN THE APOLLO SCENES.
THIS MAY HAVE BEEN
ONE OF THE REASONS
TO RELEASE "2001" A YEAR
BEFORE THE APOLLO 11 LANDING.
BY CREATING A SLOW-MOTION
ENVIRONMENT IN "2001,"
THE AUDIENCE WOULD THEN ACCEPT
THE SLOW-MOTION ENVIRONMENT
BEING PORTRAYED
IN THE APOLLO FOOTAGE.
THERE IS ONE THING
THAT I'M SURE OF.
SOME PART OF STANLEY KUBRICK
WANTED EVERYONE TO KNOW
WHAT HE HAD DONE,
AND THAT IS WHY
HE LEFT BEHIND CLUES
THAT WOULD EXPLAIN
WHO DID IT AND HOW.
BUT ALSO,
WE CAN SEE THAT KUBRICK
USED THE FAKING
OF THE APOLLO MOON MISSIONS
AS AN OPPORTUNITY
TO MAKE ONE GREAT FILM.
BECAUSE HE HAD NEGOTIATED A DEAL
WHERE NO ONE WOULD BE GIVEN
OVERSIGHT ON THE FILM,
KUBRICK WAS ALLOWED TO MAKE
WHATEVER MOVIE HE DESIRED.
KNOWING THAT NO ONE WOULD OBJECT
TO HIS ANTI-HOLLYWOOD METHODS,
HE CREATED THE FIRST
ABSTRACT FEATURE FILM,
THE FIRST INTELLECTUAL MOVIE,
AND THE GREATEST WORK OF ART
IN THE 20th CENTURY,
AND I'M TALKING ABOUT
"2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY."
[ EERIE MUSIC PLAYS ]
OUTSIDE OF THE FRONT-SCREEN
PROJECTION EVIDENCE,
WHICH I BELIEVE NAILS THE FRAUD
OF THE APOLLO LANDINGS,
THERE IS OTHER
CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE
THAT FORCES THE CONCLUSION
EVEN MORE IN THE DIRECTION
OF KUBRICK DIRECTING
THE ENTIRE APOLLO MISSIONS.
FOR INSTANCE, IN THE ORIGINAL
RELEASE OF "2001,"
THERE WERE MANY CREDITS
THANKING NASA
AND MANY OF THE AEROSPACE
COMPANIES
THAT WORKED WITH NASA
ON THE MOON LANDINGS.
THESE CREDITS
HAVE LONG BEEN REMOVED
FROM ALL SUBSEQUENT RELEASES
OF "2001."
FOR THOSE OF US
OLD ENOUGH TO REMEMBER,
IN THE ORIGINAL CREDITS,
KUBRICK THANKS A VAST ARRAY
OF MILITARY AND SPACE
CORPORATIONS
FOR THEIR HELP IN PRODUCTION.
ARE THESE THE SAME CORPORATIONS
THAT SUPPOSEDLY HELPED NASA
GET THE ASTRONAUTS TO THE MOON?
ONE HAS TO WONDER, WHAT KIND
OF HELP DID THEY GIVE STANLEY?
AND FOR WHAT PRICE?
IN THE FILM "WAG THE DOG,"
DUSTIN HOFFMAN
PLAYS A MOVIE PRODUCER
HIRED BY THE CIA
TO FAKE AN EVENT.
HIS NAME IN THE MOVIE
IS STANLEY.
IN THAT MOVIE,
STANLEY MYSTERIOUSLY DIES
AFTER TELLING EVERYONE
THAT HE WANTS TO TAKE CREDIT
FOR THE EVENT
THAT HE HELPED TO FAKE.
STANLEY KUBRICK DIED FOUR DAYS
AFTER SHOWING "EYES WIDE SHUT"
TO THE EXECUTIVES
AT WARNER BROS.
IT IS RUMORED THAT THEY WERE
VERY UPSET CONCERNING THE FILM.
THEY WANTED KUBRICK TO RE-EDIT
THE FILM, BUT HE REFUSED.
[ PIANO PLAYING ]
I PERSONALLY WAS IN FRANCE
WHEN KUBRICK DIED
AND SAW, ON FRENCH TELEVISION,
OUTTAKES FROM SEVERAL SCENES
THAT WERE NEVER IN
THE FINISHED FILM.
AND FINALLY, "EYES WIDE SHUT"
WAS RELEASED ON JULY 16, 1999.
STANLEY KUBRICK INSISTED
IN HIS CONTRACT
THAT THIS BE THE DATE
OF THE RELEASE.
JULY 16, 1999,
IS EXACTLY 30 YEARS TO THE DAY
THAT APOLLO 11 WAS LAUNCHED.
[ OMINOUS PIANO PLAYS ]
MAY I HAVE THE PASSWORD, PLEASE?
FIDELIO.
THAT'S RIGHT.
THAT IS THE PASSWORD...
FOR ADMITTANCE.
BUT MAY I ASK WHAT IS
THE PASSWORD FOR THE HOUSE?
YES.
[ PIANO CONTINUES ]
I'M SORRY.
KUBRICK FAKING
THE APOLLO MOON LANDING FOR NASA
IS REALLY OUTRAGEOUS AND SURELY
SOMEONE WOULD HAVE TALKED,
SOMEONE WOULD HAVE SAID
SOMETHING.
YOU WOULD THINK THAT KUBRICK
WOULD HAVE TOLD SOMEBODY
SOMETHING.
AND, OF COURSE,
WE KNOW HE NEVER DID.
OR DID HE?
AND THAT'S WHERE
I'M GONNA GO NEXT
BECAUSE I'M GOING TO SHOW YOU
THAT, IN FACT,
KUBRICK MADE A FILM
WHICH DESCRIBED THE ORDEAL OF
FAKING THE APOLLO MOON LANDING.
BECAUSE OVERTLY EXPLAINING
THAT HE WAS INVOLVED
IN THE FAKING
OF THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS
WOULD PROBABLY COST HIM
HIS LIFE,
STANLEY CHOSE A VEHICLE
TO DESCRIBE WHAT HE WENT THROUGH
TO FAKE
THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS.
AND I'M ABOUT TO SHOW YOU
THAT THAT VEHICLE
WAS THE FILM "THE SHINING."
"THE SHINING"
IS SURELY STANLEY KUBRICK'S
MOST MISUNDERSTOOD MASTERPIECE.
I USE THE WORD "MASTERPIECE"
GUARDEDLY
BECAUSE I'VE NEVER REALLY
THOUGHT THAT "THE SHINING"
WAS A VERY GOOD FILM.
AT THE TIME, IN 1980,
WHEN I FIRST SAW IT,
I DIDN'T LIKE IT AT ALL.
THE WAY THAT KUBRICK THREW OUT
SO MUCH OF STEPHEN KING'S
GREAT SOURCE MATERIAL
AND REPLACED IT
WITH A LOT OF THINGS
THAT JUST DIDN'T SEEM TO MAKE
ANY SENSE REALLY BOTHERED ME.
HOPEFULLY,
BEFORE I'M FINISHED HERE,
YOU WILL SEE
THAT IT IS ONLY WHEN KUBRICK
DRAMATICALLY ALTERS THE SCRIPT
FROM STEPHEN KING'S NOVEL
THAT WE CAN BEGIN TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT STANLEY KUBRICK
IS TRYING TO TELL US
IN HIS VERSION OF "THE SHINING."
IT SHOULD BE UNDERSTOOD
FROM THE BEGINNING
THAT "THE SHINING"
IS STANLEY KUBRICK'S
MOST PERSONAL FILM,
OUTSIDE OF POSSIBLY
"EYES WIDE SHUT."
BEFORE WE ARE DONE HERE,
IT WILL BE EASY TO SEE
THAT STANLEY KUBRICK WAS
ONLY USING STEPHEN KING'S NOVEL
AS A LAUNCHING PAD --
EXCUSE THE PUN --
TO BE ABLE TO TELL US
A COMPLETELY DIFFERENT STORY
UNDER THE GUISE OF MAKING A FILM
BASED ON A BEST-SELLING NOVEL.
HE DID THIS
FOR A VERY IMPORTANT REASON --
MAINLY TO SAVE HIS LIFE.
BUT LET'S NOT GET
TOO FAR AHEAD OF OURSELVES.
IN FACT,
LET'S START AT THE BEGINNING.
THERE ARE TWO MAIN CHARACTERS
IN THE FILM --
JACK TORRANCE,
PLAYED BY JACK NICHOLSON,
AND HIS SON DANNY,
PLAYED BY DANNY LLOYD.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTAND
HERE THAT JACK AND DANNY
ARE TWO ASPECTS
OF STANLEY KUBRICK HIMSELF.
JACK IS THE PRACTICAL,
PRAGMATIC GUY
WHO WANTS TO BE A GREAT ARTIST,
AND HE'S APPARENTLY WILLING
TO DO ANYTHING
TO ACCOMPLISH HIS GOAL
OF BEING AN ARTIST --
A WRITER IN THIS CASE.
JACK, LIKE STANLEY,
HAS BLACK HAIR,
IS IDIOSYNCRATIC,
AND EVEN SMOKES THE SAME
CIGARETTES AS STANLEY --
MARLBORO.
DANNY IS THE OTHER SIDE
OF THE GREAT DIRECTOR.
HE IS THE CHILDLIKE KUBRICK.
IT IS DANNY
WHO IS THE REAL ARTIST.
THE DANNY SIDE OF KUBRICK
IS PSYCHIC, YOUTHFUL,
AND SEES THINGS
THAT NO ONE ELSE SEES.
DANNY HAS A TENDENCY
TO TELL PEOPLE THINGS
THAT SHOULD HAVE BEEN
KEPT QUIET.
THE OPENING OF THE FILM
TAKES PLACE
WITH US WITNESSING
STANLEY'S PRAGMATIC SIDE --
JACK CUTTING A DEAL WITH THE
MANAGER OF THE OVERLOOK HOTEL.
THE DEAL BETWEEN JACK
AND THE MANAGER OF THE OVERLOOK
IS THAT JACK CAN WRITE --
THAT IS, CREATE --
ALL THAT HE WANTS AS LONG AS
HE TAKES CARE OF THE OVERLOOK.
ONE OTHER IMPORTANT POINT
IS THAT THE MANAGER
OF THE OVERLOOK TELLS JACK
THAT THE PREVIOUS CARETAKER WENT
CRAZY FROM THE STRESS OF THE JOB
AND KILLED HIS WIFE
AND TWO GIRLS.
THE MANAGER OF THE OVERLOOK
HOTEL, PLAYED BY BARRY NELSON,
IS WEARING RED, WHITE, AND BLUE.
JACK'S WIFE, WENDY,
PLAYED BY SHELLEY DUVALL,
AND HIS SON, DANNY,
ALSO WEAR RED, WHITE, AND BLUE
ALMOST THE ENTIRE FIRST HOUR
OF THE FILM.
YEAH. I GUESS SO.
WHAT ABOUT TONY?
HE'S LOOKING FORWARD
TO THE HOTEL, I BET.
NO, I AIN'T, MRS. TORRANCE.
NOW, COME ON, TONY.
DON'T BE SILLY.
I DON'T WANT TO GO THERE,
MRS. TORRANCE.
WELL, HOW COME
YOU DON'T WANT TO GO?
I JUST DON'T.
IN THIS SYMBOLIC INTERPRETATION,
THE OVERLOOK HOTEL IS AMERICA.
IT WAS BUILT,
JUST LIKE THE MANAGER SAYS,
ON THE GRAVES OF INDIANS.
EVEN WHEN WALKING ON THE FLOOR
OF THE OVERLOOK HOTEL,
ONE FINDS THEMSELVES
TRAMPLING OVER VARIOUS
NATIVE AMERICAN SYMBOLS.
THE OVERLOOK HOTEL IS AMERICA.
LIKE AMERICA, THE OVERLOOK HOTEL
IS NEW AND SHINY.
IT IS OSTENTATIOUS, CORNY,
AND ARCHITECTURALLY BORING.
AS THE MANAGER TELLS WENDY,
"ALL OF THE BEST PEOPLE
STAYED HERE."
-LOTS OF MOVIE STARS.
-ROYALTY?
ALL THE BEST PEOPLE.
BUT THERE IS SOMETHING
VERY DEEP HAPPENING.
KUBRICK BRUSHED SHOULDERS
WITH THE ELITE OF THE WORLD.
HE KNOWS WHAT'S GOING ON,
AND HE'S USING THIS MOVIE
TO TELL US.
WE BEGIN TO UNDERSTAND KUBRICK'S
STORY FROM HIS USE OF SYMBOLS.
AS I LIKE TO SAY, IF A PICTURE
IS WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS,
THEN A SYMBOL
IS WORTH 1,000 PICTURES.
FOR IT WILL BE THROUGH THE USE
OF SYMBOL
THAT THE REAL STORY OF
"THE SHINING" CAN BE REVEALED.
BARRY NELSON, WHO PLAYS
THE MANAGER OF THE OVERLOOK,
WHILE INTERVIEWING JACK,
HAS AN AMERICAN EAGLE
RIGHT BEHIND HIS HEAD.
IT IS AS IF THE EAGLE
IS THE POWER BEHIND THE MANAGER.
NOT ONLY IS THE EAGLE
THE SYMBOL OF AMERICA,
BUT IT SHOULD BE NOTED
THAT THE LUNAR LANDER
OF THE APOLLO 11 MISSION
WAS CALLED THE EAGLE.
TO THE MANAGER'S LEFT
ON THE DESK IS AN AMERICAN FLAG.
SYMBOLICALLY, THE MANAGER
IS THE FACE OF THE GOVERNMENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.
JACK HAS CUT THIS DEAL
WITH THE GOVERNMENT
TO BE THE CARETAKER
OF THE HOTEL.
IT SHOULD BE NOTED
THAT BARRY NELSON
IS WEARING A TOUPEE,
WHICH MAKES HIM LOOK
SUSPICIOUSLY
LIKE JOHN F. KENNEDY.
THE MANAGER TELLS JACK
THAT HIS MAIN JOB
IS TO PREVENT
THE OVERLOOK HOTEL --
THAT IS, AMERICA -- FROM
APPEARING LIKE IT IS DECAYING.
THE MANAGER REITERATES
THAT THIS IS JACK'S
PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY.
IT'S NOT A VERY DEMANDING JOB.
THE ONLY THING
THAT CAN GET A BIT TRYING
UP HERE DURING THE WINTER
IS THE TREMENDOUS SENSE
OF ISOLATION.
ON THEIR FIRST DAY IN THE HOTEL,
DANNY HAS A VISION OF THE
PREVIOUS CARETAKER'S DAUGHTERS,
AND HE SEES THAT THEY ARE TWINS.
THE PREVIOUS CARETAKER'S
DAUGHTERS
WERE NOT TWINS
IN THE STEPHEN KING NOVEL.
THIS DISCREPANCY
BETWEEN THE BOOK AND THE FILM
WILL GROW IN IMPORTANCE
AS WE CONTINUE.
JACK, DANNY, AND WENDY
ALSO MEET DICK HALLORANN,
WHO IS THE COOK
FOR THE OVERLOOK.
HE BEFRIENDS DANNY,
AND IT IS THROUGH HIM
THAT DANNY DISCOVERS
THAT HE IS NOT ALONE
WHEN IT COMES
TO PSYCHIC ABILITY.
DICK WARNS DANNY
TO STAY AWAY FROM ROOM 237.
JACK, WENDY, AND DANNY HAVE
NOW FULLY MOVED INTO THE HOTEL.
THERE'S A LONG, COLD WINTER
AHEAD OF THEM.
AT FIRST, JACK LOVES THE HOTEL,
BUT HE IS HAVING PROBLEMS
WITH HIS WRITING.
ALSO, HE CANNOT SLEEP.
MEANWHILE, WENDY AND DANNY
ARE HAVING FUN.
JACK IS NOT WRITING.
INSTEAD, HE IS THROWING
A TENNIS BALL AT THE WALL
IN THE ROOM
WHERE HIS TYPEWRITER SITS.
ON THE WALL WHICH IS BEING
STRUCK BY THE TENNIS BALL
IS A NATIVE AMERICAN
ARTISTIC MOTIF
THAT LOOKS SUSPICIOUSLY
LIKE A GROUP OF ROCKETS
ABOUT TO BE LAUNCHED.
FINALLY, JACK THROWS
THE BALL AWAY
AND IT DISAPPEARS
INTO THE DARKNESS OF THE HOTEL.
JACK WALKS OVER AND LOOKS DOWN
AT THE MODEL OF THE MAZE
WHICH SITS OUTSIDE THE HOTEL.
HE SEES WENDY AND DANNY CAUGHT
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE MAZE,
TOTALLY UNAWARE OF THE NATURE
OF THE DEAL
THAT HE HAS CUT
WITH THE OVERLOOK.
WHEN SHELLEY DUVALL AND DANNY
ARE RUNNING TOWARDS THE MAZE,
SHELLEY SAYS, "THE LOSER
HAS TO KEEP AMERICA CLEAN."
THE LOSER HAS TO KEEP
AMERICA CLEAN.
REMEMBER, JACK'S JOB
IS TO KEEP THE OVERLOOK
LOOKING LIKE IT'S NEW
EVEN THOUGH IT'S NOT.
THE OVERLOOK IS AMERICA.
THE LOSER HAS TO KEEP
AMERICA CLEAN.
20 FEET OF SNOW...
A COLD WINTER STORM
HAS NOW BLOWN OVER THE HOTEL.
THE STORM IS A SYMBOL
OF THE COLD WAR
BETWEEN RUSSIA
AND THE UNITED STATES.
OF COURSE, THE COLD WAR IS
ALSO ONE OF THE DRIVING FORCES
FOR THE ENTIRE REASON
FOR FAKING THE MOON LANDINGS.
WE WERE LIVING
IN A VERY DANGEROUS WORLD,
AND IT WAS SHREWD
TO HIDE OUR ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY
FROM THE RUSSIANS.
THIS IS ONE OF THE REASONS
FOR THE BEARS
THAT ARE SEEN
ALL OVER "THE SHINING."
THE RUSSIAN BEAR
AND ITS COMPETITION
FOR THE RACE TO THE MOON
WAS A DRIVING FORCE
BEHIND HAVING TO FAKE
THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS.
JACK, HIS FAMILY,
AND THE OVERLOOK HOTEL
ARE TRAPPED IN THE COLD,
JUST AS AMERICA WAS TRAPPED
IN THE COLD WAR WITH RUSSIA.
THE STUFFED BEARS
SEEN THROUGHOUT THE FILM
ARE SYMBOLICALLY REPRESENTING
THE SOVIET UNION'S EMPIRE.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER EXPLANATIONS
FOR THESE BEARS,
AND WE'LL GET TO THEM LATER.
SYMBOLICALLY, THE BEARS
SEEN THROUGH THE FILM
ARE ALSO THE REPRESENTATION
OF THE PRESSURE
THAT THE RUSSIANS PUT ON
THE U.S.A. TO GET TO THE MOON.
BECAUSE HE HIDES.
WHERE DOES HE GO?
TO MY STOMACH.
DOES TONY EVER TELL YOU
TO DO THINGS?
I DON'T WANT TO TALK
ABOUT TONY ANYMORE.
DANNY IS RACING HIS TRICYCLE
DOWN THE HALLWAYS
OF THE OVERLOOK.
SUDDENLY HE STOPS
AND SEES THE TWIN GIRLS
AT THE END OF THE HALLWAY.
IN UNISON, THEY SAY TO DANNY,
"COME PLAY WITH US,
DANNY...FOREVER AND EVER."
COME AND PLAY WITH US, DANNY...
FOREVER...
AND EVER...
AND EVER.
[ OMINOUS MUSIC PLAYING ]
AT THIS POINT IN THE FILM,
WE GRAPHICALLY DISCOVER
THE NATURE OF THE DEAL
THAT JACK REALLY HAS CUT
WITH THE MANAGER
OF THE OVERLOOK.
IT IS THE MOST CRUCIAL SCENE
IN THE FILM.
DANNY IS IN A HALLWAY,
PLAYING WITH HIS TRUCKS.
PLEASE NOTE THAT THE CARPET
HAS THESE STRANGE HEXAGONAL
PATTERNS IN THEM
WITH A LONG LINE IN FRONT
OF THE HEXAGONAL PATTERN.
NOW LOOK AT THESE PICTURES
OF LAUNCH PAD 39
AT CAPE CANAVERAL
AND SEE THAT THEIR LAUNCH PADS
LOOK VERY SIMILAR
TO THE PATTERNS ON THE CARPET
THAT DANNY IS PLAYING ON.
ALSO, PLEASE NOTE THAT DANNY
IS PLAYING WITH TRUCKS
AND IT LOOKS ALMOST
AS IF THE TRUCKS AND EVERYTHING
ARE ON THE LAUNCH PAD
SURROUNDING THE ROCKET.
BUT WHERE IS THE ROCKET?
SUDDENLY, OUT OF NOWHERE,
THE OVERLOOK HOTEL ROLLS
THE TENNIS BALL FROM NOWHERE,
THE TENNIS BALL
THAT JACK LOST EARLIER.
IT IS A GESTURE, AND THE GESTURE
SAYS, "WANT TO PLAY?"
MYSTIFIED BY WHERE THE BALL
CAME FROM, DANNY STANDS UP,
AND THE AUDIENCE FINALLY SEES
WHAT THE NATURE OF THE
SECRET PROJECT IS REALLY ABOUT.
AS DANNY STANDS UP, THE ANSWER
IS REVEALED IN AN INSTANT.
DANNY IS WEARING A SWEATER
WITH A CRUDELY SEWN ROCKET
PICTURED ON THE FRONT.
ABOVE THE ROCKET
CLEARLY SEEN ON DANNY'S SWEATER
ARE THE WORDS "APOLLO 11."
THE AUDIENCE WATCHING THE FILM
LITERALLY SEES THE LAUNCH
OF APOLLO 11
RIGHT BEFORE THEIR EYES AS DANNY
RISES UP FROM THE FLOOR.
IT ISN'T THE REAL LAUNCH
OF APOLLO 11.
IT IS, OF COURSE, THE SYMBOLIC
LAUNCHING OF APOLLO 11.
IN OTHER WORDS, IT ISN'T REAL.
WHAT HAPPENS NEXT IS CRUCIAL
TO UNDERSTANDING EVERYTHING ELSE
THAT HAPPENS IN THIS FILM.
DANNY, BEWILDERED,
WALKS DOWN THE HALLWAY.
HE SEES THAT ROOM 237, THE ROOM
THAT HALLORANN WARNED HIM ABOUT,
HAS A KEY IN THE LOCK,
AND THE DOOR IS WIDE OPEN.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO KNOW
THAT THE ROOM IN QUESTION
WAS NUMBER 217
IN THE STEPHEN KING VERSION
OF "THE SHINING."
FOR REASONS UNKNOWN,
KUBRICK CHANGED IT TO 237.
MOM, ARE YOU IN THERE?
THOSE UNKNOWN REASONS
ARE ABOUT TO BECOME KNOWN.
DANNY IS LITERALLY CARRYING
A SYMBOLIC APOLLO 11 ON HIS BODY
VIA THE SWEATER TO THE MOON
AS HE WALKS OVER TO ROOM 237.
WHY DO I THINK THIS?
BECAUSE THE AVERAGE DISTANCE
FROM THE EARTH TO THE MOON
IS 237,000 MILES.
NOW, SOME PEOPLE
MAY ARGUE WITH THIS
AND SAY THAT IT'S ACTUALLY
238,000 MILES AND CHANGE.
THE MOON IS
IN A SLIGHTLY ELLIPTICAL ORBIT,
WHICH MEANS SOMETIMES THE MOON
IS MUCH FURTHER AWAY FROM
THE EARTH THAN AT OTHER TIMES.
IF YOU DO THE MATH
AND YOU FIGURE IT OUT,
YOU CAN SEE
THAT THE TRUE DISTANCE
THAT THE MOON IS FROM THE EARTH
IS 237,000 MILES.
EVEN MORE IMPORTANT
TO THIS ARGUMENT,
AT THE TIME THAT KUBRICK
FAKED THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS,
IT WAS COMMON KNOWLEDGE
IN THE TEXTBOOKS
AND THE SCIENTIFIC WORK
THAT THE MOON WAS 237,000 MILES
AWAY FROM THE EARTH.
THIS IS THE FIGURE
THAT STANLEY WAS WORKING WITH,
AND THAT IS WHY HE CHANGED
THE ROOM FROM 217 TO 237.
THE REAL TRUTH
IS THAT THIS MOVIE
IS REALLY ABOUT THE DEAL
THAT STANLEY KUBRICK MADE
WITH THE MANAGER OF
THE OVERLOOK HOTEL -- AMERICA.
THIS DEAL WAS TO GET STANLEY
TO RE-CREATE --
IN OTHER WORDS, TO FAKE --
THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS.
DANNY REPRESENTS
THE ARTISTIC SIDE OF KUBRICK.
BECAUSE OF THE COMPLEXITY
OF THE ARTISTIC REALIZATION
OF THE MANNER IN WHICH THE LUNAR
LANDINGS NEEDED TO APPEAR,
KUBRICK NEEDED
TO TRUST HIS ARTISTIC SIDE.
ROOM 237
REPRESENTS THE FAKE LUNAR SET
THAT STANLEY HAD TO CREATE
TO MAKE THE LUNAR LANDINGS
APPEAR FACTUAL.
BUT REALLY ON THIS SET AND
IN THIS ROOM, NOTHING IS REAL.
AS THE FILM WILL SOON REVEAL,
ROOM 237 HAS TO BE LIED ABOUT.
IT CANNOT BE UNDERSTOOD
AT ALL -- EVER.
NOTHING REAL
EVER HAPPENS IN ROOM 237.
WHEN DANNY OPENS UP THE DOOR
TO ROOM 237,
WE SEE THE TAG
ATTACHED TO THE KEY.
AND IF YOU JUST LOOK AT
THE CAPITAL LETTERS ON THE TAG,
YOU CAN SEE THAT IT SAYS
"ROOM" -- R-O-O-M --
AND THEN "N,"
AND THERE'S A SMALL "O."
WE DISCARD THE SMALL "O,"
WE'RE LEFT WITH R-O-O-M AND "N."
YOU CAN ACTUALLY GET TWO WORDS
OUT OF IT,
AND THOSE TWO WORDS
ARE "MOON ROOM."
SO, HERE WE HAVE THE TAG
ATTACHED TO THE KEY.
IT'S IN THE DOOR IN ROOM 237,
AND THE LETTERS ON THE TAG
COME OUT TO SAY "MOON ROOM."
IS THIS WHAT STANLEY
CALLED THE LUNAR SET?
REALLY?
JACK TELLS WENDY
THAT IN HIS DREAM,
HE HAS KILLED WENDY AND DANNY.
I KILLED YOU AND DANNY.
BUT I DIDN'T JUST KILL YOU.
[ SOBS ]
I CUT YOU UP INTO LITTLE PIECES.
OH.
OH, MY GOD.
MEANWHILE,
DANNY ENTERS THE SCENE,
AND IT IS OBVIOUS
THAT SOME MYSTERIOUS FORCE
HAS PHYSICALLY HURT DANNY.
THIS MYSTERIOUS FORCE HAS
ALSO TORN HIS APOLLO 11 SWEATER.
WENDY, HORRIFIED,
THINKS THAT JACK DID IT.
AND IN A WAY, SHE IS RIGHT,
BECAUSE DANNY GOT HURT BECAUSE
OF THE DEAL THAT JACK CUT.
FRUSTRATED, JACK GOES TO THE BAR
LOCATED IN THE GOLD ROOM.
OBVIOUSLY STRESSED,
JACK WHISPERS TO NO ONE
THAT HE WOULD SELL HIS SOUL
FOR A DRINK.
IT IS THEN THAT JACK
MEETS THE REAL MANAGER
OF THE OVERLOOK HOTEL.
A MYSTERIOUS MAN
SUDDENLY APPEARS BEHIND THE BAR.
HIS NAME IS LLOYD, AND HE IS THE
BARTENDER OF THE OVERLOOK HOTEL.
CLEARLY, STANLEY KUBRICK
SHOWS LLOYD IN A SATANIC LIGHT.
LLOYD SEDUCES JACK WITH A DRINK.
JACK HAS SOLD HIS SOUL
TO THE PROJECT,
TO BEING THE CARETAKER
OF THE OVERLOOK.
JACK AND LLOYD'S CONVERSATION IS
INTERRUPTED BY WENDY'S ENTRANCE.
LLOYD AND JACK'S GLASS OF SCOTCH
SUDDENLY DISAPPEAR.
WENDY TELLS JACK THAT
SOMEONE ELSE IS IN THE HOTEL.
SHE TELLS HIM
THAT DANNY WAS HURT
BY SOMEONE
WHO'S INSIDE ROOM 237.
JACK THEN GOES TO ROOM 237,
AND HE SEES THE MANIFESTATION OF
A YOUNG WOMAN INTO AN OLD WOMAN.
I BELIEVE THIS SCENE OCCURS
BECAUSE AT FIRST KUBRICK
THOUGHT THAT DIRECTING
THE APOLLO 11
AND LATER MOON LANDINGS
WAS GOING TO BE A SEXY JOB.
BUT ONCE HE STARTED IN
ON THE PROJECT
AND HAD TO DEAL WITH THE MINUTIA
OF TRYING TO FAKE
THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS
DAY AFTER DAY,
QUICKLY THE SEXY WOMAN
TURNS INTO AN OLD HAG.
SO, THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS
STARTED OUT AS A SEXY PROJECT
FOR STANLEY,
BUT SOON IT TURNED
INTO THE EQUIVALENT
OF KISSING AN OLD LADY.
[ LAUGHING ]
THE DOOR WAS OPEN.
THE LIGHTS WERE ON.
I JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND.
[ SOBS ] WH--
I MEAN, WHAT ABOUT
THOSE BRUISES ON HIS NECK?
SOMEBODY DID THAT TO HIM.
[ CRYING ]
I THINK...
HE DID IT TO HIMSELF.
NO.
THAT'S NOT POSSIBLE.
WENDY...
ONCE YOU RULE OUT
HIS VERSION OF WHAT HAPPENED,
THERE IS NO OTHER EXPLANATION.
IS THERE?
NOW THAT JACK
HAS LIED TO HIS WIFE,
HE'S ABLE TO SEE ALL
OF THE SPIRITS OF THE OVERLOOK.
SOME OF THE BEST PEOPLE
STAYED HERE.
THE SECRET GROUP
THAT RULES THE OVERLOOK
CAN FINALLY BE SEEN BY JACK --
KUBRICK.
HE HAS BEEN LET
INTO THEIR POSH SOCIETY.
HI, LLOYD.
BEEN AWAY, BUT NOW I'M BACK.
GOOD EVENING, MR. TORRANCE.
IT'S GOOD TO SEE YOU.
IT'S GOOD TO BE BACK, LLOYD.
WHAT WILL IT BE, SIR?
HAIR OF THE DOG THAT BIT ME.
BOURBON ON THE ROCKS.
THAT'LL DO IT.
♪ YOUR EYES
HELD A MESSAGE TENDER ♪
♪ SAYING "I SURRENDER
ALL MY LOVE TO YOU" ♪
NO CHARGE TO YOU, MR. TORRANCE.
♪ MIDNIGHT ♪
NO CHARGE?
YOUR MONEY'S NO GOOD HERE.
♪ I KNOW
ALL MY WHOLE LIFE THROUGH ♪
ORDERS FROM THE HOUSE.
♪ I'LL BE REMEMBERING YOU ♪
♪ MIDNIGHT ♪
DRINK UP, MR. TORRANCE.
I'M THE KIND OF MAN
WHO LIKES TO KNOW WHO'S BUYING
THEIR DRINKS, LLOYD.
IT'S NOT A MATTER THAT
CONCERNS YOU, MR. TORRANCE.
AT LEAST NOT AT THIS POINT.
ANYTHING YOU SAY, LLOYD.
ANYTHING YOU SAY.
BUT AT THE PARTY OF RICH PEOPLE,
JACK GETS A DRINK SPILLED ON HIM
BY THE WAITER,
WHO TURNS OUT TO BE
THE PREVIOUS CARETAKER
WHO KILLED HIS TWIN DAUGHTERS.
IN THIS,
WE DISCOVER SOMETHING PROFOUND.
ALTHOUGH IT LOOKS LIKE HE, JACK,
HAS BEEN ACCEPTED
INTO THIS SECRET HIGH SOCIETY,
HE IS STILL JUST A SERVANT.
JACK WILL END UP
AS A WAITER OR A JANITOR,
JUST LIKE GRADY,
THE PREVIOUS CARETAKER,
HAS ENDED UP AS A WAITER.
BUT MR. GRADY, WHO DENIES THAT
HE WAS THE PREVIOUS CARETAKER,
TELLS JACK THAT DANNY
IS INFORMING SOMEONE
ABOUT THE SECRET APOLLO HOAX.
I'M SORRY TO DIFFER WITH YOU,
SIR.
BUT YOU ARE THE CARETAKER.
YOU HAVE ALWAYS BEEN
THE CARETAKER.
I SHOULD KNOW, SIR.
I'VE ALWAYS BEEN HERE.
♪ WE'RE STILL IN LOVE ♪
[ CHUCKLES ]
DID YOU KNOW, MR. TORRANCE,
THAT YOUR SON IS ATTEMPTING
TO BRING AN OUTSIDE PARTY
INTO THIS SITUATION?
DID YOU KNOW THAT?
NO.
AFTER THIS, JACK BEGINS
TO GO TO HELL PHYSICALLY.
HE STARTS GROWING
AN UNKEMPT BEARD
AND STOPS COMBING HIS HAIR --
TWO THINGS THAT STANLEY KUBRICK
WAS KNOWN FOR DOING
OR NOT DOING HIMSELF.
NOW JACK IS LOOKING
A LOT LIKE STANLEY KUBRICK,
ESPECIALLY AS HE BEGAN TO APPEAR
UNDER THE STRESS OF THE TWIN
PRODUCTIONS GOING ON AT ONCE --
ONE, "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY,"
AND, TWO, FAKING
THE APOLLO 11 LANDINGS.
IT SHOULD ALSO BE NOTED
THAT JACK AND STANLEY
ARE ABOUT THE SAME AGE
AND THEY HAVE
THE SAME HAIR COLOR.
EARLY "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY"
PRODUCTION PHOTOS
SHOW A YOUTHFUL AND UNBEARDED
KUBRICK WITH COMBED HAIR,
LOOKING QUITE HANDSOME.
BUT PHOTOS
TAKEN FOUR YEARS LATER
NEAR THE END OF THE PRODUCTION
OF "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY"
SHOW THAT KUBRICK
WAS A PHYSICAL WRECK.
THE DE-EVOLUTION
OF STANLEY KUBRICK'S APPEARANCE
DURING THE PRODUCTION
OF "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY"
IS DISTURBINGLY CLOSE
TO JACK NICHOLSON'S APPEARANCE
IN "THE SHINING."
[ TYPEWRITER KEYS CLACKING ]
DESPITE
HIS DISHEVELED APPEARANCE,
JACK HAS STARTED WRITING AGAIN.
WENDY, WHO IS REALLY SUPPOSED TO
BE KUBRICK'S WIFE, CHRISTIANE,
WANTS TO READ THE BOOK THAT JACK
IS WORKING SO FURIOUSLY ON.
JACK ANGRILY TEARS OUT THE SHEET
OF PAPER FROM HIS TYPEWRITER
IN ORDER TO PREVENT WENDY
FROM SEEING IT.
SHE ASKS TO SEE
WHAT HE IS WRITING.
GET A LOT WRITTEN TODAY?
JACK IS SURPRISED
BY HER ENTRANCE
INTO THE ROOM
WHERE HE DOES HIS WRITING.
ANGRILY, HE REJECTS HER.
HE TELLS HER TO STAY OUT
OF THE ROOM WHERE HE IS WRITING.
OH, COME ON, HON.
DON'T BE SO GROUCHY.
I'M NOT BEING GROUCHY.
I JUST WANT TO FINISH MY WORK.
OKAY.
I UNDERSTAND.
I'LL COME BACK LATER ON WITH
A COUPLE OF SANDWICHES FOR YOU,
AND MAYBE YOU'LL LET ME
READ SOMETHING THEN.
WENDY...
[ CLEARS THROAT ]
LET ME EXPLAIN SOMETHING TO YOU.
WHENEVER YOU COME IN HERE
AND INTERRUPT ME,
YOU'RE BREAKING
MY CONCENTRATION.
YOU'RE DISTRACTING ME.
AND IT WILL THEN TAKE ME TIME
TO GET BACK TO WHERE I WAS.
UNDERSTAND?
YEAH.
FINE.
AND WE'RE GONNA MAKE A NEW RULE.
WHENEVER I'M IN HERE,
WHEN YOU HEAR ME TYPING...
[ TYPEWRITER KEYS CLACKING ]
...OR WHETHER
YOU DON'T HEAR ME TYPING,
WHATEVER THE FUCK
YOU HEAR ME DOING IN HERE,
WHEN I'M IN HERE,
THAT MEANS THAT I AM WORKING.
THAT MEANS DON'T COME IN.
NOW, DO YOU THINK
YOU CAN HANDLE THAT?
YEAH.
FINE.
WHY DON'T YOU START RIGHT NOW
AND GET THE FUCK OUT OF HERE,
HMM?
AFTER HE IS DONE TELLING HER
TO STAY OUT OF THE ROOM,
HE GOES BACK TO THE TYPEWRITER.
BUT NOW IT HAS SOMEHOW PUT
A NEW PAGE INTO THE TYPEWRITER.
JACK IS NOT SURPRISED THAT THE
TYPEWRITER HAS A NEW PAGE IN IT
AND GOES BACK TO WRITING.
IS THIS A CONTINUITY ERROR?
HARDLY.
KUBRICK IS CLEARLY SHOWING US
THAT WHATEVER JACK IS WRITING
MUST BE HIDDEN FROM HIS WIFE.
BUT MORE IMPORTANTLY,
HE IS SAYING THAT THE OVERLOOK
HOTEL ITSELF, THAT IS, AMERICA,
WHICH IS FEEDING THE PAPER
INTO JACK'S TYPEWRITER.
KUBRICK SUCCINCTLY SHOWS US
THAT IT IS NOT JACK
WHO IS IN CHARGE OF THIS THING.
IT IS THE OVERLOOK.
IT IS CLEAR
THAT WENDY, KUBRICK'S WIFE,
WAS NOT ALLOWED TO KNOW
ANYTHING ABOUT THE PROJECT.
BUT WHAT IS THIS BOOK
THAT JACK IS WRITING?
WENDY SOON FINDS OUT
WHAT IS IN THE BOOK
THAT JACK IS WORKING ON.
IT IS THEN
THAT WE GET THE CLINCHER
THAT PROVES
THAT THIS POINT OF VIEW
IS THE CORRECT INTERPRETATION
OF KUBRICK'S "THE SHINING."
WENDY SNEAKS
INTO JACK'S WRITING ROOM.
SLOWLY SHE BEGINS
TO READ THE BOOK
THAT JACK HAS BEEN WORKING ON.
NOW, THIS SCENE IS TOTALLY
ORIGINAL TO THE MOVIE.
IT IS NOT IN THE KING NOVEL.
ALTHOUGH IT IS
MILDLY TERRIFYING,
IT'S NOT THAT HORRIFIC.
YET IT IS THE CENTERPIECE
OF THE FILM
AND ARGUABLY THE SCARIEST SCENE
IN THE MOVIE.
WHY?
BECAUSE EVERY SINGLE ONE
OF THE HUNDREDS OF PAGES THAT
JACK HAS BEEN FURIOUSLY WRITING
IS A VARIATION
OF ONLY ONE SENTENCE --
"ALL WORK AND NO PLAY
MAKES JACK A DULL BOY."
INCREDIBLY, EVERY PAGE
HAS THIS EXACT SENTENCE,
AND IT IS WRITTEN OVER AND OVER.
TRULY, IT IS SCARY ENOUGH
TO THINK THAT JACK HAS BEEN
SITTING THERE DAY AFTER DAY
WRITING THE SAME SENTENCE
OVER AND OVER.
WENDY'S FACE REVEALS HER FEAR
OVER THIS DISCOVERY.
WHAT DOES IT ALL MEAN?
MAY I HUMBLY SUGGEST
THAT THE WORD "ALL"
IN THIS REPEATED SENTENCE
ACTUALLY STANDS FOR A11 --
THAT IS, APOLLO 11?
"A11 WORK AND NO PLAY
MAKES JACK A DULL BOY."
MAY I SUGGEST THAT THE NICKNAME
OR CODE NAME
FOR THE FAKING OF THE APOLLO
MOON MISSION WAS "A11"?
[ EERIE MUSIC PLAYING ]
ACCEPTING THAT THIS IS TRUE,
WE CAN SEE WHAT STANLEY
IS REALLY TELLING US.
APOLLO 11 WORK AND NO PLAY MAKES
JACK -- KUBRICK -- A DULL BOY.
IF YOU THINK
THAT I'M STRETCHING THINGS HERE,
I WOULD LIKE TO POINT OUT
THE PATCH THAT NASA HAD CREATED
TO SYMBOLIZE THE APOLLO PROGRAM.
THERE ARE OTHER "A"s
IN THE FILM, ALSO.
THE OVERLOOK HOTEL HAS SEVERAL
"A"s BUILT INTO ITS CONSTRUCTION
WHEN VIEWED FROM THE OUTSIDE.
STANLEY HAS USED THESE "A"s
BEFORE.
HERE IS THE COVER
OF "A CLOCKWORK ORANGE"
WITH ALEX MENACINGLY
COMING OUT OF THE "A"
WITH HIS ALL-SEEING-EYE
CUFF LINK.
IT IS CLEAR THAT THE EVIDENCE
PRESENTED IN THE FILM
THAT KUBRICK'S WIFE --
SHELLEY DUVALL --
HAD DISCOVERED THAT HE,
STANLEY KUBRICK,
HAD MADE A SECRET DEAL WITH
THE MANAGER OF THE OVERLOOK,
I.E., WITH THE RULERS
OF THE U.S.A.
SHELLEY DUVALL,
I.E. CHRISTIANE KUBRICK,
ALSO DISCOVERED THAT
WHAT SHE THOUGHT WAS ONE THING
ACTUALLY TURNED OUT
TO BE ANOTHER.
WHAT MRS. KUBRICK DISCOVERED
WAS THAT INSTEAD OF MAKING
A SCIENCE-FICTION FILM
CALLED "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY,"
HER HUSBAND
WAS REALLY WORKING TO CREATE
THE FAKE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS.
AT THIS POINT, THE FILM GETS
REALLY INTERESTING.
FRIGHTENED BY THIS REVELATION,
WENDY WANTS JACK --
STANLEY -- TO QUIT THE PROJECT.
JACK -- STANLEY --
ANGRILY REPLIES,
"THAT IS SO TYPICAL OF YOU.
I'VE MADE AN AGREEMENT.
I HAVE OBLIGATIONS
TO MY EMPLOYERS."
JACK LOOKS AT HER AND SAYS,
"DO YOU HAVE ANY IDEA
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO MY FUTURE
IF I FAILED TO LIVE UP
TO MY RESPONSIBILITY?"
ARE YOU CONCERNED ABOUT ME?
OF COURSE I AM!
OF COURSE YOU ARE.
HAVE YOU EVER THOUGHT ABOUT
MY RESPONSIBILITIES?
OH, JACK,
WHAT ARE YOU TALKING ABOUT?
HAVE YOU EVER HAD
A SINGLE MOMENT'S THOUGHT
ABOUT MY RESPONSIBILITIES?
HAVE YOU EVER THOUGHT
FOR A SINGLE, SOLITARY MOMENT
ABOUT MY RESPONSIBILITIES
TO MY EMPLOYERS?!
[ SOBS ]
HAS IT EVER OCCURRED TO YOU
THAT I HAVE AGREED TO LOOK AFTER
THE OVERLOOK HOTEL
UNTIL MAY THE 1st?
DOES IT MATTER TO YOU AT ALL
THAT THE OWNERS HAVE PLACED
THEIR COMPLETE CONFIDENCE
AND TRUST IN ME AND THAT I HAVE
SIGNED A LETTER OF AGREEMENT,
A CONTRACT, IN WHICH I HAVE
ACCEPTED THAT RESPONSIBILITY?
DO YOU HAVE THE SLIGHTEST IDEA
WHAT A MORAL
AND ETHICAL PRINCIPLE IS?!
DO YOU?!
HAS IT EVER OCCURRED TO YOU
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO MY FUTURE
IF I WERE TO FAIL TO LIVE UP
TO MY RESPONSIBILITIES?
HAS IT EVER OCCURRED TO YOU?!
DANNY USES HIS GIFT
OF THE SHINING
TO CONTACT DICK HALLORANN
IN FLORIDA --
WHICH, I MIGHT ADD, IS WHERE
APOLLO 11 WAS LAUNCHED.
DICK LABORIOUSLY TRAVELS
FROM FLORIDA TO COLORADO.
PARDON ME, MISS.
WHAT TIME ARE WE GETTING
TO DENVER?
WE'RE DUE TO ARRIVE AT 8:20,
SIR.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
IN KING'S NOVEL,
JACK HAS A RED VOLKSWAGEN.
BUT KUBRICK CHANGED IT TO
A YELLOW VOLKSWAGEN IN THE FILM.
WHEN HALLORANN IS DRIVING TO
THE OVERLOOK IN THE SNOWSTORM,
HE SEES A RED VOLKSWAGEN
COMPLETELY WRECKED
BY A SEMI TRUCK.
THIS IS COLD-HEARTED MESSAGE
DIRECTLY FROM STANLEY KUBRICK
TO STEPHEN KING
THAT HIS VEHICLE,
THE NOVEL "THE SHINING",
HAS BEEN WRECKED BY KUBRICK AND
REPLACED WITH KUBRICK'S VERSION.
I REALLY HAVE TO WONDER
WHAT STEPHEN KING THOUGHT
OF KUBRICK'S FILM WHEN HE SAW
THIS SCENE,
ESPECIALLY SINCE HE WAS
THE ONLY ONE IN THE WORLD
WHO UNDERSTOOD
STANLEY'S MESSAGE.
IN ANOTHER ABRUPT BREAK
WITH THE NOVEL,
JACK TORRANCE KILLS HALLORANN
AS SOON AS HE ARRIVES
AT THE OVERLOOK.
SO MUCH FOR HALLORANN'S
PSYCHIC ABILITIES.
WHILE I THINK THIS SCENE
IS VERY DISTURBING
AND I DOUBT
IF I CAN EVER PROVE THIS,
BUT I THINK STANLEY KUBRICK
IS TELLING US
SOMETHING VERY DEFINITE
WITH THIS ALTERATION...
-HELLO?
-...TO THE KING NOVEL.
I BELIEVE THAT THE NAIVE SIDE
OF HIM, REPRESENTED BY DANNY,
TOLD SOMEONE THAT HE, KUBRICK,
WAS FAKING
THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS.
HE MAY HAVE EVEN TOLD
THIS PERSON
THAT HE WAS FAKING
THE LUNAR LANDINGS FOR NASA
WHILE APPEARING TO PRODUCE THE
FILM "2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY."
HALLORANN IS THE REPRESENTATION
OF THE PERSON...
-[ SCREAMING ]
-... THAT KUBRICK MISTAKENLY
REVEALED THIS MOST SECRET
OF ALL INFORMATION.
WHEN HALLORANN AND DANNY HAD A
CONVERSATION ABOUT THE SHINING,
HALLORANN WARNS DANNY
TO STAY AWAY FROM ROOM 237.
HE SAYS, "YOU AIN'T GOT
NO BUSINESS GOING TO ROOM 237,
SO JUST STAY OUT."
AS HALLORANN IS THE ONLY PERSON
TO WARN DANNY -- STANLEY --
ABOUT ROOM 237,
THE MOON LANDING STAGE,
STANLEY WENT
TO THIS MYSTERIOUS CONFIDANT
AND TOLD HIM THAT HE WAS RIGHT.
STANLEY SHOULD HAVE STAYED AWAY
FROM ROOM 237,
THE MOON LANDING STAGE.
BECAUSE OF THAT, HALLORANN,
OR THE PERSON WHO STANLEY TOLD,
HAD TO DIE.
THE SECRET MUST REMAIN SAFE.
YOU'RE SCARED OF ROOM 237,
AIN'T YOU?
NO, I AIN'T.
MR. HALLORANN,
WHAT IS IN ROOM 237?
NOTHING.
THERE AIN'T NOTHING IN ROOM 237.
BUT YOU AIN'T GOT NO BUSINESS
GOING IN THERE ANYWAY,
SO STAY OUT.
THIS ALSO EXPLAINS
WHY KUBRICK HAD TO HIDE
ALL OF THIS CRUCIAL INFORMATION
INSIDE THE CONSTRUCT
OF THE KING NOVEL.
KUBRICK WANTED THE STORY
TO GET OUT,
BUT HE WAS ALSO AFRAID
FOR HIS LIFE.
KUBRICK HAD TO FAKE THE MAKING
OF THE STEPHEN KING NOVEL
SO THAT HE COULD REVEAL
THAT HE WAS INVOLVED
IN FAKING THE MOON LANDINGS.
THE TRUTH IS THAT "THE SHINING"
IS A STORY
OF HOW STANLEY KUBRICK CUT
A DEAL WITH THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
TO FAKE
THE APOLLO MOON LANDINGS.
IT IS ALSO THE STORY OF HOW
KUBRICK MAY HAVE ACCIDENTALLY
TOLD SOMEONE WHAT HE HAD DONE
AND HOW THAT PERSON
HAD TO BE KILLED.
"THE SHINING" IS ALSO THE STORY
OF HOW FAKING THE MOON LANDINGS
ALMOST SACRIFICED
HIS RELATIONSHIP WITH HIS WIFE.
FINALLY, IT IS THE STORY
OF HOW STANLEY KUBRICK
BARELY ESCAPED ALIVE.
"THE SHINING" IS THE STORY OF
HOW A PART OF STANLEY KUBRICK
WAS KILLED BY THE AGREEMENT THAT
HE MADE WITH THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
TO BECOME THE CARETAKER
OF THE PROJECT CALLED A11,
OR APOLLO 11.
IT IS ALSO THE HISTORY OF NASA.
THIS EXPLAINS
WHY THE PREVIOUS CARETAKER,
WHO WAS SO PRESSURED
AND STRESSED
THAT HE HAD TO KILL
HIS TWIN DAUGHTERS. WHY?
BECAUSE
THE PREVIOUS NASA MISSIONS
BEFORE APOLLO WERE NAMED GEMINI.
THE GEMINI ARE TWINS.
THIS IS WHY KUBRICK SWITCHED
THE GIRLS
FROM JUST BEING SISTERS
TO BEING TWINS.
AT ONE HOUR AND 55 MINUTES
INTO THE FILM,
JACK WAKES UP IN THE PANTRY
SURROUNDED BY BOXES
THAT SAY "39,000."
APOLLO 11 TOOK OFF
FROM LAUNCH PAD 39.
OTHER BOXES SAY "GOLDEN RAY,"
WHICH IS WHAT COMES FROM APOLLO,
THE SUN GOD.
FINALLY, WE SEE TANG,
THE DRINK THAT WENT TO THE MOON
WITH THE ASTRONAUTS.
[ MUSIC PLAYS ]
AND FINALLY,
THE ENDING SHOT OF "THE SHINING"
HAS JACK AT A 4th OF JULY PARTY
IN 1921.
IN HIS RIGHT HAND,
HE IS HOLDING A SECRET NOTE.
THERE IS ALSO A GENTLEMAN
BEHIND JACK,
WHO IS TRYING TO STOP HIM FROM
SHOWING US THE SECRET NOTE.
WHAT IS IN THIS SECRET NOTE?
YOU HAVE JUST FOUND OUT.
[ MID-TEMPO MANDOLIN MUSIC
PLAYS ]
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ PLANS WERE MADE BY THE BANKERS
IN THE BACK ROOM ♪
♪ GET THE PRESIDENT
OUT OF THE WAY ♪
♪ AND HIRE STANLEY KUBRICK ♪
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ EVERYONE HOPED THAT THE BOYS
WOULD COME HOME SOON ♪
♪ ONE MORE DAY, AND THEY'LL DROP
FROM THE PLANE ♪
♪ SPLASH INTO THE OCEAN ♪
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ WERHER von BRAUN
AND HIS CONSPIRATORS ♪
♪ GOT A FREE RIDE
TO THE STATES ♪
♪ THEY TURNED NAZI INTO NASA ♪
♪ THEY JUST COULDN'T WA-A-A-IT ♪
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ AHH-AH-AH-AH-AH ♪
♪ AHH-AH-AH-AH-AH-AH-AH-AH ♪
♪ AHH-AH-AH-AH-AH-AAH-AH ♪
♪ UNDER THE MASONIC MOON ♪
♪ PLANS WERE MADE BY THE BANKERS
IN THE BACK ROOM ♪
♪ THE OWL SEES INTO THE NIGHT ♪
♪ AND THE SECRET
WOULD NEVER BE TOLD ♪